# CONCLUSIONS

*Remember: This is the **first** cybersecurity book you’ll ever need.*

Cybersecurity, or the lack thereof, is going to have an impact on your company. It probably has already; you just haven’t noticed it yet. If that’s the case, you shouldn’t feel bad. There is no such thing as a perfectly secure or “hack-proof” company, but if you address the issue on a daily basis—treat it like any other essential element of your business—it improves your ability to reduce risk, effectively deal with threats, and protect the value of your technology investments, and the value of your business overall.

Why not treat cybersecurity as special? Because the shine of special things tends to fade over time. Remember Theory Z?   Total Quality Management?   Remember that hot business book by that famous guy that everyone was talking about five years ago? You see where I’m going. Contrast “special” with the ordinary: inventory, payroll, production, receivables, etc. People get proficient at the things that get done every day. The ordinary stuff. That’s what security needs to be for you: something you deal with every day because if you don’t, you’re going to forget about it. You’re going to get lax, and whatever time, money, and effort you expended in the quest to improve security will have been wasted.

Improving the cybersecurity posture of your company does not have to be complicated or expensive. By addressing the fundamentals, you can dramatically reduce risk and take a wide range of threats to your enterprise off the table. The edge cases are still there, but that’s where the bad guys have to operate now: on the edge. It’s where things are more difficult, more expensive, and riskier. Remember: there is no such thing as perfect cybersecurity. Your goal is to implement the right amount of security to address the threats that your firm is most likely to face, not go broke trying to prevent every obscure problem that exists under the sun. People in security make a lot of noise about “advanced” threats,  but when it comes down to it, the bad guys will use the minimum amount of sophistication necessary in order to achieve their goals. Addressing the fundamentals makes you a harder target. It drives up the costs associated with trying to hack you (Return on Investment (ROI) is important to bad guys too), and extends the time necessary to succeed, which increases the likelihood of getting caught. Fundamentals aren’t sexy, but they are essential to success.  

There is no shortage of people who will tell you that you need to do this and that, and buy that and the other thing, in order to “be secure.” They’re not wrong in a general sense, but they may not be right for you in a specific sense. Have they asked you what business you’re in? How you do business? Is their solution tailored to your enterprise, or are they telling you that you need to change how you do business before their solution will work? Is the price of this magic bean they’re selling more than the projected loss you’d suffer if you were actually attacked? There is a difference between those who are just selling stuff, and those who are offering solutions. 

Like your car, house, or the physical plant you operate, long-term success in cybersecurity requires that you perform regular maintenance. A change in your business (you’re making widgets and xidgits now), how you do business (we’re going to sell through channel partners, not directly), and who you do business with (we’re adding three new suppliers from overseas), means revisiting all the decisions you made with regards to security. You need to ensure that you are not disregarding new risks or introducing new avenues of attack for which you do not have a defense. The “weakest link in the chain” analogy applies to cybersecurity as much as it does anything else. The more connections you have, the more opportunities for exploitation. 

All the policies, procedures, and tools in the world are useless if you do not create a culture of security in your company. Your employees need to view security policy as seriously as they do rules about financial transactions, safety regulations, or harassment. This starts at the top. CEO-level buy-in is what makes or breaks a security program. If the boss says they care but don’t behave like they do, people are not going to take it seriously.

Establishing and maintaining a good cybersecurity posture is hard work, but the price of not having one could have significant negative impacts. It is actually fairly rare that a company will go out of business because they got hacked (and only because they got hacked), but the number of companies that have done so is not zero. If nothing else, hacked companies end up spending a lot of money that would otherwise have been profit, on cleaning up digital messes, and in many cases dealing with lawsuits. What would you rather be doing: running your business, or arguing in court why your inadequate defenses are not justification for a finding of negligence, defending yourself in front of your board from a charge of incompetence, or explaining to your shareholders why this quarter’s financials are in the toilet?

You worked hard to make your company what it is today. A sound cybersecurity posture is something that will add value to, and help protect what you’ve built. Like everything else you do, you want to do the job right. When it comes to cybersecurity, the results of that effort may be intangible, but the sense of satisfaction and pride associated with a job well done is the same. 

[About the Author](/Author.md)

---

Order your own copy of [The First Cybersecurity Book Your Company Will Ever Need](https://www.amazon.com/dp/B07S1RMRY1) at Amazon.com
