# INTRODUCTION

On November 8th 2003, the Oklahoma Sooners and Texas A&M Aggies took to the gridiron. When it was all over, the Sooners had scored 77 points to the Aggies’ goose egg. Both teams went through their normal pre-game rituals, and both teams took to the field thinking victory was within their grasp. Neither team thought they would be a party to one of the worst blowouts in college football history.

It’s not like Texas A&M is some kind of slouch when it comes to football. Until the 2003 season they had not had a losing season in 21 years. In fact, the next year they went 7-5 overall and 5-3 in their conference. Were the Aggies the inferior team? Well, they weren’t ranked, so in a sense, yes, but 77 points inferior? Did they not try hard enough? Were they outcoached? We can speculate all we want, but in the end, there was nothing the Aggies could have done. That day, everything was working against them. 

That’s kind of how it is with cybersecurity. If we’re being honest, the deck is stacked against everyone who uses a computer. The technology that makes so many things more convenient and efficient is also so complicated and poorly built that the resulting weaknesses can pose a threat to the viability of your business if they are exploited. Ask anyone who writes software for a living, and they’ll tell you that most computer programs are ’78 Ford Pintos with full tanks of gas that are about to be rear-ended by a school bus.  

Think about the trust you put in the technology that runs your business. Most, if not all of the information technology (IT) you use is made by big name firms that have been around for years and have great reputations. The problem is, all that technology is subject to something called Sturgeon’s Law, which states that 90 percent of everything is crap. How do we know this applies to IT? The government sponsors a thing called the Common Vulnerabilities Exchange (CVE), which is a database of vulnerabilities found in software. As of the date this page was drafted, it contained 111,716 entries going back to 1999. That’s just a fraction the broken things that people have bothered to report for public consumption. Not every vulnerability is reported to the CVE, so 111,716 is the basement as far as how bad things really are.

The companies that made the software you use in your business sold you a functional product, not a secure one. That’s the market at work. You asked for something that worked, not something that worked and was hacker resistant. Building IT products is like building a house. You can build a house any old way you like, or you can build a house that complies with the building code. The two houses may look identical, but when it rains, or a tornado comes, or when you put any kind of stress on the first house, you will find out very quickly why we have building codes. 

Mandatory building codes for IT don’t exist. Because of that, both curious and malicious people have figured out how to stress that technology in order to find weaknesses. The malicious contingent among those groups exploits those weaknesses to the tune of several billion dollars a year. That’s lost money, intellectual property, productivity, opportunity, and reputation that businesses like yours pay for in myriad ways. Security costs money, but insecurity can cost your business a lot more. It can, literally, cost you your business.

I’ve spent most of my life working in cybersecurity, and I’m the first to admit that my colleagues and I have not made it easy for laypeople to understand the problems at hand, or how to deal with them. More often than not we try to scare you into action with horror stories—there is probably one on the news right now. This book is my attempt to correct those failings and misguided efforts. I hope to make these issues more accessible, and to provide you with simple, and more importantly, cost-effective ways to deal with the most common cybersecurity problems.

## Why Worry About Cybersecurity?

I know cybersecurity feels like one of those things being forced on you by people who don’t know your business and who think money grows on trees. You want to think that all those media stories about companies getting hacked don’t really apply to you and what you’re doing. While there is no denying that there is a threat, the question is: what sort of threat do you actually face? If you have to deal with that threat, is the impact likely to be a worst-case scenario, or something less serious? 

The nature of cyber threats can range wildly, from a slow death from a thousand small cuts made over the course of years on one end, to something catastrophic and immediate on the other. Another factor to consider is that you don’t have to be a victim directly, to be impacted by a cybersecurity threat. If a customer is hacked, that might mean delays in payment or cancellation of orders. If your suppliers get hacked, that could mean delays in receiving critical parts or raw materials, and in turn the inability to fulfill orders. Like all risky events in your life, you really want to try to deal with it on your terms if possible, but doing so requires knowledge, not only about the overall threat, but about the risk that threat poses to your business. 

I could throw in a lot of statistics and the results of countless surveys about the scope and scale of the cybersecurity problem, but those kinds of numbers don’t tell the whole story, much less an accurate one. Surveys capture a mere slice of the overall pie that is every business, much less businesses like yours. Even in anonymous surveys, people are prone to making “statements inconsistent with the truth” in order to make themselves look good, and to minimize the impact of anything bad that happened to them. 

So, let’s talk about numbers that matter to you for a minute. How much did you spend on your IT, Internet of Things (IoT) technology, or operational technology (OT) in your business? What would be the impact to your business if you lost the use of—or the data supplied by—those resources? Temporarily, like from a power outage? Long-term, like from a tornado? You derive a lot of value from all of that technical infrastructure. A sound cybersecurity posture is one of the things that helps protect that value. It is equal parts insurance, preventative maintenance, and vigilance; all the things that one can, and should, do to protect investments of any kind, and improve the likelihood of their continued availability.

*“Sure, but how much is this going to cost me?”*

Great question. You don’t want to spend more protecting a thing than the thing itself is worth. Given that the cybersecurity product and service market is somewhere around $150 billion dollars annually, you know people aren’t giving solutions away, but it is important to note that you can dramatically improve your cyber security posture without spending a dime. In those rare cases when you do need to spend money, you can accomplish a lot for a few dollars per employee, per year. Better security doesn’t have to equate to a six-figure expenditure. 

## Who This Book is For

This book is for companies commonly described as being an “SMB” or small-to-medium-sized business. Officially, SMBs are defined by size as having less than 1,000 employees, and in economic terms as having less than $1 billion in annual revenue. Who is the target audience in these companies? I’m speaking to executives and managers who are trying to comply with security laws or regulations, but don’t know where to start. You’re listening to news about the hack of the month and don’t really understand what’s being said or if any of it applies to you. You’re watching the lips of security product salespeople move, but are afraid you’re being taken advantage of. I’m talking to business owners and company officers who have seen what happens to companies like theirs when security efforts fall short (disruption in production, massive unbudgeted expenses, fines, penalties, lawyer’s fees, loss of reputation, loss of contracts, etc.). Company leaders who are trying to answer questions from the board about what is being done to help ensure the firm doesn’t end up on the news as the latest victim of a cyberattack. People who can’t afford to turn their company into Fort Knox, but who also don’t want to be found negligent and facing penalties when something bad happens and the smoke clears.

## How to Use This Book

Think of this book as a primer. A textbook on cybersecurity 101. It covers a core set of principles and issues that apply to all businesses. It will help you build a foundation upon which you can build a more substantial cybersecurity program if you so choose. If you opt not to go any further, you are still in a much better situation than you were before. If you know nothing about cybersecurity, I recommend reading every chapter, front to back. If you have some level of cyber defense in place, feel free to pick and choose the chapters that will help you fill gaps in the program you have.

Cybersecurity is a complicated thing, and we could go on for volumes, but I worked very hard to focus on the center mass, and to make sure no chapter is longer than it needs to be. You don’t want to hear a diatribe. You don’t need to know all the “inside baseball” security nerds will delve into for hours if given half a chance. You want sound, cost-effective, and actionable recommendations, so that’s what you’re going to get. If you want more details, or to know more in general, a companion website has been set up at cybersecuritystart.com.

Every technology and every course of action discussed herein should be readily understood by your IT person/people. The odds that they don’t know about these things to one degree or another is pretty low; the odds are pretty high that they’ve been dying to implement them but haven’t had the top cover they needed to do so. You’re about to give the company computer nerds more work, but I don’t think they’re going to be that upset about it.

Ease Into It

If cybersecurity is an issue you are concerned about, you may decide to get online and do some research on your own to see what’s what. Maybe you’ll reach out to your friend Dave, who has a daughter who does cybersecurity work, to get her take on things. Here is what you’re going to find out: this is a field that is a mile wide. It has a lot of subdisciplines in it, each of which are a mile deep. It can get very technical, very fast. It is also filled with people with very strong opinions. This includes Dave’s daughter, who is almost assuredly going to take issue with something I’m about to say, or something I’ve left out. My recommendation to you is to pace yourself for the time being. 

I don’t say that because I’m jealous, or because I think my advice is the be-all, end-all. I say this because, like learning how to swim, you can ease into it and gain confidence and skill over time, or you can get thrown in the deep end, and hope you figure it out before you run out of air. Think about this for a minute: if you ask someone, “Who makes the best cars?” and that person drives a Ford, and has one of those stickers on the back window with the little boy peeing on a Chevy logo, you kind of already know what they are going to say. It is the same in computer security. If you ask an expert in cryptography  how to address a security problem, they’ll say there is a cryptographic solution for that, which is like saying the solution to getting around town after a flood is to give people stilts: not necessarily wrong, but maybe not the ideal approach.

No one paid me to write this. No company I talk about in this book handed me a manila envelope full of unmarked bills to mention their name. I’ve been responsible for selling a security product, only to find that the person I was talking to would derive better benefits from a competitor, and I told them so. I’m about reasonable, workable, cost-effective solutions, because the more organizations that have solutions in place—period—the better off we’ll all be. 

Cybersecurity problems are common, but the best solutions are unique to each enterprise and scenario. The solution that worked for Alice across town, or Bob over in Cleveland, may not work for your company, even if you’re all in the same line of work. There are not quite as many solutions to a given computer security problem as there are ways to skin a cat, but there are more than one, and they may come from various disciplines. A specific approach recommended by a famous expert in an interview on TV or on a web site isn’t going to be wrong per se, but it might not be right given the particulars of your enterprise and how you do business.

It does not help that some cybersecurity experts love to focus on edge cases: extreme, rare situations that could lead to serious consequences if they were to occur. Think airplane-hitting-your-house-while-you’re-on-the-toilet kind of rare. Yeah, it would suck being the person who died with their pants down around their ankles and a propeller stuck in their forehead, but of all the things we worry about on a daily basis, that’s pretty far down the list. Getting t-boned at that intersection on County D where they haven’t trimmed the bushes back so you can’t see people coming around the corner is much more likely. That’s what we’re focusing on here: the fundamental things you need to deal with in order to address the most common threats and reduce your exposure to risk. Approaches that will work for the vast majority of organizations, regardless of what you do for a living.

If you know someone who knows something about computer security and you ask them about the content of this book, they’re probably going to mention a few other things that might be considered fundamental, hence the companion web site cybersecuritystart.com, where more advice and guidance will be posted over time. That same person is almost certainly going to wander off into edge-case territory: “That’s all well and good, but you also need to consider…” and then talk about their own pet peeves. They may be right, but the odds are pretty high that they’re talking about something you don’t need to address right now. I’m intentionally not going to address man-in-the-middle attacks, or how an attacker can extract data from an air-gapped system via sound waves, or “advanced persistent threats.” What would be the point? To continue with the football analogy we started with: it’s the beginning of training camp, and the order of the day is blocking and tackling, not mimicking O’Dell Beckham’s one-handed touchdown catch. 

## A Word on Terminology

I use the word “cybersecurity” in the title and throughout this book because it is a term that the largest segment of the population (non-experts) understand to mean the security of computers and networks, and the information generated, processed, transmitted, and stored on same. If you talk to another security expert, they may find the term misleading or downright abhorrent. They’ll want to talk about the origins of the word “cyber” and how “hacker” isn’t really a bad word, etc. I agree with those people, but this isn’t a book for experts. I could break the topics in each chapter down using the terms like computer security, and information security, and information assurance, computer network defense, confidentiality, integrity, availability … but how quickly would you tune out? How soon would we get lost in the weeds? I understand the importance of definitions, but this is not an academic exercise, it’s a practical one. Pedantry doesn’t advance the cause, at least for you, at this point in time. 

Next: [Fundamentals](/Fundamentals.md)

---

Order your own copy of [The First Cybersecurity Book Your Company Will Ever Need](https://www.amazon.com/dp/B07S1RMRY1) at Amazon.com
